# Tests

This appendix consists out of a few tests that should all render to proper
`xml2rfc` XML.

## A very long title considerations with regards to the already deployed routing policy.

Test a very long title.

## Reference

Refer to [RFC 2119](#RFC2119) if you will.

## Spanx

_underscores_
*asterisks*
**double asterisks**
`backticks`

## Lists in Lists

1. First we do
2. And then
    * item 1
    * item 2

And the other around.

* First we do
* Then
    1. Something
    2. Another thing

Description lists:

Item to explain:

:   It works because of herbs

Another item to explain

:    More explaining

     Multiple paragraphs in such a list

## Lists in Description Lists

Item to explain:
:   It works because of

    1. One
    2. Two

Another item to explain:
:   More explaining

Item to explain:
:   It works because of

    1. One1
    2. Two1
        
        * Itemize list
        * Another item

Another item to explain again:
:   More explaining


## List with Description Lists

1. More

    Item to explain:
    :   Explanation ...

    Item to explain:
    :   Another explanation ...

2. Go'bye

## Multiple Paragraphs in Lists

1. This is the first bullet point and it needs multiple paragraphs...

    ... to be explained properly.

2. This is the next bullet. New paragraphs should be indented with 4 fourspaces.

3. Another item with some artwork, indented by 8 spaces.

        Artwork

4. Final item.

xml2rfc does not allow this, so the second paragraph is faked with a

    <vspace BlankLines='1'>

## Roman Lists

Lowercase:

i. Item 1
ii. Item 2

Uppercase:

I.  Item1
II.  Item2
II.  Item 3

## Default List Markers

#. First item
#. Second item
#. Another item

## Uppercase Letters

A.  First item
B.  Second item

## Artwork in Description Lists

Item1:

:    Tell something about it. Tell something about it. Tell something about it.
    Tell something about it. Tell something about it. Tell something about it.

        miek.nl.    IN  NS  a.miek.nl.                             
        a.miek.nl.  IN  A   127.0.0.1    ; <- this is glue            

    Tell some more about it.
    Tell some more about it.
    Tell some more about it.

Item2:

:   Another description

## Table Tests

### Simple Tables

  Right     Left     Center     Default
-------     ------ ----------   -------
     12     12        12            12
    123     123       123          123
      1     1          1             1

Table:  Demonstration of simple table syntax.

### Multiline Tables

-------------------------------------------------------------
 Centered   Default           Right Left
  Header    Aligned         Aligned Aligned
----------- ------- --------------- -------------------------
   First    row                12.0 Example of a row that
                                    spans multiple lines.

  Second    row                 5.0 Here's another one. Note
                                    the blank line between
                                    rows.
-------------------------------------------------------------

Table: Here's the caption. It, too, may span
multiple lines.

### Grid Tables

: Sample grid table.

+---------------+---------------+--------------------+
| Fruit         | Price         | Advantages         |
+===============+===============+====================+
| Bananas       | $1.34         | built-in wrapper   |
+---------------+---------------+--------------------+
| Oranges       | $2.10         | cures scurvy       |
+---------------+---------------+--------------------+
