# Introduction

This document presents a technique for using Pandoc syntax as a source format for
documents in the Internet-Drafts (I-Ds) and Request for Comments (RFC) series.

This version is adapted to work with `xml2rfc` version 2.x.

Pandoc is an "almost plain text" format and therefor particularly well suited
for editing RFC-like documents.

> Note: this document is typeset in Pandoc and does not render completely correct when
> reading it on github.

# Pandoc to RFC

> Pandoc2rfc -- designed to do the right thing, until it doesn't.

When writing [](#RFC4641) we directly wrote the
XML. Needless to say it was tedious even thought the XML of
[xml2rfc](http://xml.resource.org/experimental) is very "light". The [latest version
of xml2rfc version 2 can be found here](http://pypi.python.org/pypi/xml2rfc/).

During the last few years people have been developing markup languages that are very easy to remember
and type. These languages have become known as `almost plain text`-markup languages.
One of the first was the [Markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/) 
syntax. One that was developed later and incorporates Markdown and a number of extensions 
is [Pandoc](http://johnmacfarlane.net/pandoc/). The power of Pandoc also comes from the
fact that it can be translated to numerous output formats, including, but not limited to:
HTML, (plain) Markdown and `docbook` XML.

So using Pandoc for writing RFCs seems like a sane choice. As `xml2rfc` uses XML,
the easiest way would be to create `docbook` XML and transform that using
XSLT. Pandoc2rfc does just that. The conversions are, in some way amusing, as we start
off with (almost) plain text, use elaborate XML and end up with plain text again.

    +-------------------+   pandoc   +---------+  
    | ALMOST PLAIN TEXT |   ------>  | DOCBOOK |  
    +-------------------+            +---------+  
                  |                       |
    non-existent  |                       | xsltproc
      faster way  |                       |
                  v                       v
          +------------+    xml2rfc  +---------+ 
          | PLAIN TEXT |  <--------  | XML2RFC | 
          +------------+             +---------+ 
    @Figure: Attempt to justify Pandoc2rfc.

The XML generated (the output after the `xsltproc` step in [](#fig:attempt-to)) 
is suitable for inclusion in either the `middle` or `back` section
of an RFC. The simplest way is to create a template XML file and include the appropriate
XML:

    <?xml version='1.0' ?>
    <!DOCTYPE rfc SYSTEM 'rfc2629.dtd' [
    <!ENTITY pandocMiddle PUBLIC '' 'middle.xml'>
    <!ENTITY pandocBack   PUBLIC '' 'back.xml'>
    ]>

    <rfc ipr='trust200902' docName='draft-gieben-pandoc-rfcs-02'>
     <front>
        <title>Writing I-Ds and RFCs using Pandoc v2</title>
    </front>

    <middle>
        &pandocMiddle;
    </middle>

    <back>
        &pandocBack;
    </back>

    </rfc>
    @Figure: A minimal template.xml.

See the Makefile for an example of this. In this case you need to edit
3 documents:

1. middle.pdc - contains the main body of text;
1. back.pdc - holds appendices and references;
1. template.xml (probably a fairly static file).

The draft (`draft.txt`) you are reading now, is automatically created when you call `make`. 
The homepage of Pandoc2rfc is [this github repository](https://github.com/miekg/pandoc2rfc).

## Dependencies

It needs `xsltproc` and `pandoc` to be installed. See the [Pandoc user manual for
the details](http://johnmacfarlane.net/pandoc/README.html) on how to type in Pandoc
style. And ofcourse `xml2rfc` version two.

When using Pandoc2rfc consider adding the following sentence to an Acknowledgements
section:

     This document was produced using the Pandoc2rfc tool.

# Starting a new project
When starting a new project with `pandoc2rfc` you'll need to copy the following files:

* `Makefile`
* `transform.xslt`
* And the above mentioned files:
    * `middle.pdc`
    * `back.pdc`
    * `template.xml`

After that you can start editing.

# Supported Features

* Sections with an anchor and title attributes ([](#section));
* Lists
    * style=symbols ([](#symbol));
    * style=numbers ([](#number));
    * style=empty ([](#empty));
    * style=format %i, use roman lowercase numerals, ([](#roman));
    * style=format (%d), use roman uppercase numerals ([](#roman));
    * style=letters (lower- and uppercase, [](#letter));
    * style=hanging ([](#hanging));
* Figure/artwork with a title ([](#figureartwork));
* Block quote - not supported by `xml2rfc`, this is converted to
    `<list style="hanging">` paragraph ([](#block-quote));
* References 
    * external (eref) ([](#external)); 
    * internal (xref) ([](#internal)), you can refer to:
        * section (handled by Pandoc, see [](#references-1)));
        * figures (handled by XSLT, see [](#references));
        * tables (handled by XSLT, see [](#references-2)).
* Citations, by using internal references;
* Spanx style=verb, style=emph and style=strong ([](#spanx-styles));
* Tables with an anchor and title ([](#tables));
* Indexes, by using footnotes ([](#indexes)).

# Unsupported Features

* Lists inside a table (`xml2rfc` doesn't handle this);
* Pandoc markup in the caption for figures/artwork. Pandoc markup for table captions
  *is* supported;
* crefs: for comments (no input syntax available), use HTML comments: `<!-- ... -->`;


# Acknowledgements

The following people have helped to make Pandoc2rfc what it is today:
Benno Overeinder, Erlend Hamnaberg, Matthijs Mekking, Trygve Laugstøl.

This document was prepared using Pandoc2rfc.

# Pandoc Constructs

So, what syntax do you need to use to get the correct output? Well, it
is *just* Pandoc. The best introduction to the Pandoc style is given
in this [README from Pandoc itself](http://johnmacfarlane.net/pandoc/README.html).

For convenience we list the most important ones in the following sections.

## Paragraph

Paragraphs are separated with an empty line.

## Section
Just use the normal sectioning commands available in Pandoc, for instance:

    # Section1 One
    Bla

Converts to: `<section title="Section1 One" anchor="section1-one">`
If you have another section that is also named "Section1 One", that
anchor will be called "section1-one-1", but *only* when the sections are in
the *same* source file!

Referencing the section
is done with `see [](#section1-one)`, as in see [](#section).

## List Styles

A good number of styles are supported.

### Symbol

    A symbol list.

    * Item one;
    * Item two.

Converts to `<list style="symbol">`:

* Item one;
* Item two.

### Number

    A numbered list.

    1. Item one;
    1. Item two.

Converts to `<list style="numbers">`:

1. Item one;
1. Item two.

### Empty
Using the default list markers from Pandoc:

    A list using the default list markers.

    #. Item one;
    #. Item two.

Converts to `<list style="empty">`:

#. Item one;
#. Item two.

### Roman
Use the supported Pandoc syntax:

    ii. Item one;
    ii. Item two.

Converts to `<list style="format %i.">`:

ii. Item one;
ii. Item two.

If you use uppercase Roman
numerals, they convert to a different style:

    II. Item one;
    II. Item two.

Yields `<list style="format (%d) ">`:

II. Item one;
II. Item two.

### Letter

A numbered list.

    a.  Item one;
    b.  Item two.

Converts to `<list style="letters">`: 

a.  Item one;
b.  Item two.

Uppercasing the letters works too (note two spaces after the letter.

    A.  Item one;
    B.  Item two.

Becomes:

A.  Item one;
B.  Item two.

### Hanging
This is more like a description list, so we need to use:

    First item that needs clarification:

    :   Explanation one
    More stuff, because item is difficult to explain.
    * item1
    * item2

    Second item that needs clarification:

    :   Explanation two

Converts to: `<list style="hanging">` and `<t hangText="First item that...">`

If you want a newline after the hangTexts, search for the string `OPTION` in `transform.xsl`
and uncomment it.

## Figure/Artwork
Indent the paragraph with 4 spaces.

    Like this

Converts to: `<figure><artwork> ...`
Note that `xml2rfc` supports a caption with `<artwork>`. Pandoc does not support this, but Pandoc2rfc
does. If you add a `@Figure: some text` as the last line, the artwork gets a
`title` attribute with the text
after `@Figure: `. It will also be possible to reference the artwork. If a caption is supplied the artwork
will be centered. If a caption is needed
but the figure should not be centered use `@figure:\ `. 

### References
The reference anchor
attribute will be: `fig:` + `first 10 (normalized) characters from the caption`. Where normalized means:

* Take the first 10 characters of the caption (i.e. this is the text *after* the string `@Figure: `);
* Spaces and single quotes (') are translated to a minus `-`;
* Uppercase letters translated to lowercase.

So the first artwork with a caption will get `fig:a-minimal-`
as a reference. See for instance [](#fig:a-minimal-). 

This anchoring is completely handled from within the `xslt`. Note that duplicate anchors are an
XML validation error which will make `xml2rfc` fail.

## Block Quote
This is not supported by `xml2rfc`, but any paragraph like:

    > quoted text

Converts to: `<t><list style="hanging" hangIndent="3"> ...` paragraph.

## References
### External
Any reference like:

    [Click here](URI)

Converts to: `<ulink target="URI">Click here ...`

### Internal
Any reference like:

    [Click here](#localid)

Converts to: `<link target="localid">Click here ...`

For referring to RFCs (for which you manually need add the reference source in the template,
with an external XML entity), you can just use:

    [](#RFC2119)

And it does the right thing. Referencing sections is done with:

    See [](#pandoc-constructs)

The word 'Section' is inserted automatically: ... see [](#pandoc-constructs) ...
For referencing figures/artworks see [](#figureartwork).
For referencing tables see [](#tables).

## Spanx Styles

The verb style can be selected with back-tics: `` `text` ``
Converts to: `<spanx style="verb"> ...`

And the emphasis style with asterisks: `*text*` or underscores: `_text_`
Converts to: `<spanx style="emph"> ...`

And the emphasis style with double asterisks: `**text**`
Converts to: `<spanx style="strong"> ...`

## Tables
A table can be entered as:

      Right     Left     Center     Default                                                                  
      -------   ------ ----------   -------                                                                  
           12     12        12        12                                                                   
          123     123       123       123                                                                   
            1     1         1         1       

      Table: A caption describing the table.
      @Figure: A caption describing the figure describing the table.

Is translated to `<texttable>` element in `xml2rfc`. You can choose multiple styles
as input, but they all are converted to the same style (plain `<texttable>`) table in `xml2rfc`.
The column alignment is copied over to the generated XML.

### References
The caption is *always* translated to a `title` attribute.
If a table has a caption, it will *also* get a reference. The reference anchor
attribute will be: `tab:` + `first 10 (normalized) characters from the caption`. Where normalized means:

* Take the first 10 characters of the caption (i.e. this is the text *after* the string `Table: `);
* Spaces and single quotes (') are translated to a minus `-`;
* Uppercase letters translated to lowercase.

So the first table with a caption will get `tab:a-caption-`
for reference use. See for instance <!-- [](#tab:demonstrat). -->

This anchoring is completely handled from within the `xslt`.
Note that duplicate anchors are an XML validation error which will make `xml2rfc` fail.

## Indexes
The footnote syntax of Pandoc is slightly abused to support an index. 
Footnotes are entered in two steps,
you have a marker in the text, and later you give actual footnote text. Like this:

    [^1]

    [^1]: footnote text

We re-use this syntax for the `<iref>` tag. The above text translates to:

    <iref item="footnote text"/>

Sub items are also supported. Use an exclamation mark (`!`) to separate them:

    [^1]: item!sub item

# Usage guidelines

## Working with multiple files
As an author you will probably break up a draft in multiple files, each dealing with a
subject or section. When doing so sections with the same title will clash with each other. 
Pandoc can deal with this situation, but only if the different sections are in the *same*
file or processed in the same Pandoc run. 
Concatenating the different section files before processing them is a solution
to this problem. You can, for instance, amend the `Makefile` and add something like this:

    allsections.pdc: section.pdc.1 section.pdc.2 section.pdc.3
            cat $@ > allsections.pdc

And then process `allsection.pdc` in the normal way.

## Setting the title
If you use double quotes in the documents title in the `docName` attribute, like:

    <rfc ipr="trust200902" docName="draft-gieben-writing-rfcs-pandoc-02">

The Makefile will pick this up automatically and make a symbolic link:

    draft-gieben-writing-rfcs-pandoc-00.txt -> draft.txt

This makes uploading the file to the i-d tracker a bit easier.

## Uploading the XML/txt

The `draft.xml` target will generate an XML file with all XML included, so you can upload
just one file to the I-D tracker.

## VIM syntax highlighting
If you are a VIM user you might be interested in a syntax highlighting file (see [](#VIM)) that
slightly lightens up your reading experience while viewing a draft.txt from VIM.

# Security Considerations
This document raises no security issues.

# IANA Considerations
This document has no actions for IANA.
